2021-2022 NBA analytics 

Group Members: Zack McWilliams, Louis Warner, Dylan Suther

The NBA has recently taken to hiring data analysts to break down advanced statistics about the player’s and the teams’ performance. These statistics, such as most effective lineups on the court, matchups that have the highest success rate of a basket, etc. are given to the coaching staff to improve the team’s gameplay strategies. Our project goal is to analyze data from the 2021-2022 season to determine which performs the best in any given category.

The data analyst job inside the NBA can be very difficult and competitive, but it is only becoming more important and growing at a fast rate. The average salary throughout the United States for an NBA data analyst is 74k. Looking at most job listings on the NBA’s website every single job working with data requires a bachelor's degree and some even require a master's degree in computer science. Every job posting also requires tons of experience in the IT industry. Most of the job listings are remote. During the NBA offseason there will probably be more job listings posted.

We plan on using data from:  2021-22 NBA Player Stats: Per Game
The site allows you to find data for each player, giving their gameplay statistics for a variety of categories. This data can be manipulated, analyzed, and then presented as if we were giving it to the front office of a basketball organization.

Since the data is not provided in a file format, we can use BeautifulSoup to scrape the data from the website to find information for a number of different players. Pandas can then be used to both sort the data into tables, and then organize/clean the data. Matplotlib can be used to present the data in a friendly, easily understood format, such as graphs that could be presented to basketball coaches and staff. Finally, we can use the Scikit-learn library to implement machine learning algorithms such as linear regression to predict certain team and player statistics.

Breaking down by league, conference, division, and team, we will use graphs to compare players within these organizations to determine which ones are the top performers in certain categories. We also plan on taking the data from the NBA stats website and graphing it to visualize the NBA teams based on their offensive efficiency rating, defense efficiency rating, and both combined to show which teams performed the best. This visualization should show the top teams in the league and should translate to a positive record. We also plan on using a linear regression algorithm to predict players efficiency ratings based on their stats. Since different positions get their efficiency ratings based on different stats, we need to separate the players by position and run the linear regression algorithm for them separately. The current positions we plan on using linear regression on are the shooting guard and center positions. We chose these two positions, as the shooting guard is a driving force on a teams offense, and the center is a driving force on a teams defense. Depending on time, we may implement linear regression for more positions as well. Linear regression may be a helpful algorithm as, if there is a linear relationship between the data, it will be able to predict the performance of a new player given unseen data. The choice of algorithm, however, may change as we explore and learn more about the data after its extracted.

The only reading that will be needed for this assignment is the stats that are posted on the website and the team record.

Since the 2021 - 2022 NBA Championships resulted in the Golden State Warriors defeating the Boston Celtics, we expect to see these teams to have performed the best, with some of the highest offensive and defensive efficiency ratings. We also expect these teams to have lineups with remarkably high stats and high player efficiency ratings. On the opposite end of the spectrum, we expect to see teams that performed the worst this season such as the Houston Rockets, Orlando Magic, and Detroit Pistons to have some of the lowest offensive and defensive efficiency ratings, as well as lineups where players have low efficiency ratings and lower stats than average. Using our linear regression machine learning algorithm, we expect  shooting guards with high offensive stats such as field goal percentage to have higher player efficiency ratings. We also expect players at the center position with high defensive stats such as defensive rebounds to have high player efficiency ratings, vice versa. 

References
“NBA Careers.” NBA Careers, 4 Aug. 2016, https://careers.nba.com/. 
Salary: NBA Data Analyst (March, 2023) United States - ZipRecruiter. https://www.ziprecruiter.com/Salaries/NBA-Data-Analyst-Salary. 
“2021-22 NBA Player Stats: Per Game.” Basketball, https://www.basketball-reference.com/leagues/NBA_2022_per_game.html. 
